id: om-jai-saraswati-mata
kind: aarti
deity: saraswati
lang: hi
language: Hindi
region: North India
title: ॐ जय सरस्वती माता | Om Jai Saraswati Mata | Aarti of Maa Saraswati
author: Traditional | traditional
occasions: basant-panchami, navratri, daily
when: Sung on Basant Panchami and before study in schools and homes. In South India, Saraswati Puja falls during Navratri.
notes: Sung to the same tune as Om Jai Jagdish Hare.
refrain-first: yes

--- refrain
ॐ जय सरस्वती माता, मैया जय सरस्वती माता।
सद्गुण वैभव शालिनी, त्रिभुवन विख्याता॥
~ Om jai Saraswati Mata, Maiya jai Saraswati Mata,
~ Sadgun vaibhav shalini, tribhuvan vikhyata.
= Om, glory to Mother Saraswati! Rich in every virtue and splendour, famed in all three worlds.

---
चन्द्रवदनि पद्मासिनि, द्युति मंगलकारी।
सोहे शुभ हंस सवारी, अतुल तेजधारी॥
~ Chandravadani padmasini, dyuti mangalkari,
~ Sohe shubh hans savari, atul tejdhari.
= Moon-faced goddess seated on a lotus, your radiance brings blessings. You ride the auspicious swan and shine with matchless light.

---
बाएँ कर में वीणा, दाएँ कर माला।
शीश मुकुट मणि सोहे, गल मोतियन माला॥
~ Baayen kar mein veena, daayen kar mala,
~ Sheesh mukut mani sohe, gal motiyan mala.
= The veena is in your left hand and a rosary in your right. A jewelled crown graces your head and a string of pearls your neck.

---
देवी शरण जो आए, उनका उद्धार किया।
पैठी मंथरा दासी, रावण संहार किया॥
~ Devi sharan jo aaye, unka uddhar kiya,
~ Paithi Manthara dasi, Ravan sanhar kiya.
= Goddess, you raised up all who came to your refuge. You entered the mind of the maid Manthara and so brought about Ravan’s end.

---
विद्या ज्ञान प्रदायिनि, ज्ञान प्रकाश भरो।
मोह अज्ञान और तिमिर का, जग से नाश करो॥
~ Vidya gyan pradayini, gyan prakash bharo,
~ Moh agyan aur timir ka, jag se naash karo.
= Giver of learning and wisdom, fill us with the light of knowledge, and drive delusion, ignorance and darkness from the world.

---
धूप दीप फल मेवा, माँ स्वीकार करो।
ज्ञानचक्षु दे माता, जग निस्तार करो॥
~ Dhoop deep phal meva, Maa sweekar karo,
~ Gyanchakshu de Mata, jag nistar karo.
= Mother, accept our incense, lamp, fruit and dry fruits. Give us the eye of wisdom and carry the world across.

---
माँ सरस्वती की आरती, जो कोई जन गावे।
हितकारी सुखकारी, ज्ञान भक्ति पावे॥
~ Maa Saraswati ki aarti, jo koi jan gaave,
~ Hitkari sukhkari, gyan bhakti paave.
= Whoever sings this aarti of Mother Saraswati gains wisdom and devotion, which bring wellbeing and happiness.
