id: om-jai-lakshmi-mata
kind: aarti
deity: lakshmi
lang: hi
language: Hindi
region: North India
title: ॐ जय लक्ष्मी माता | Om Jai Lakshmi Mata | Aarti of Maa Lakshmi
author: Traditional | traditional
occasions: diwali, dhanteras, daily
when: The heart of Lakshmi Puja on Diwali evening, sung after the Ganesh aarti. Also sung on Fridays and on Dhanteras.
notes: Sung to the same tune as Om Jai Jagdish Hare, whose pattern it follows. Some editions print “हरि विष्णु विधाता” in the refrain.
refrain-first: yes

--- refrain
ॐ जय लक्ष्मी माता, मैया जय लक्ष्मी माता।
तुमको निशदिन सेवत, हर विष्णु विधाता॥
~ Om jai Lakshmi Mata, Maiya jai Lakshmi Mata,
~ Tumko nishdin sevat, Har Vishnu Vidhata.
= Om, glory to Mother Lakshmi! Shiv, Vishnu and Brahma worship you day and night.

---
उमा रमा ब्रह्माणी, तुम ही जग माता।
सूर्य चन्द्रमा ध्यावत, नारद ऋषि गाता॥
~ Uma Rama Brahmani, tum hi jag mata,
~ Surya Chandrama dhyavat, Narad rishi gata.
= You are Uma, Rama and Brahmani, mother of the world. The sun and moon meditate on you and the sage Narad sings your glory.

---
दुर्गा रूप निरंजनि, सुख सम्पत्ति दाता।
जो कोई तुमको ध्यावत, ऋद्धि सिद्धि धन पाता॥
~ Durga roop niranjani, sukh sampatti data,
~ Jo koi tumko dhyavat, riddhi siddhi dhan pata.
= Pure one in the form of Durga, giver of happiness and plenty: whoever meditates on you gains abundance, success and wealth.

---
तुम पाताल निवासिनि, तुम ही शुभदाता।
कर्म प्रभाव प्रकाशिनि, भवनिधि की त्राता॥
~ Tum Patal nivasini, tum hi shubhdata,
~ Karm prabhav prakashini, bhavnidhi ki trata.
= You dwell even in the netherworld, and you alone bestow good fortune. You bring the fruits of our deeds to light and carry us across the ocean of worldly life.

---
जिस घर में तुम रहतीं, सब सद्गुण आता।
सब सम्भव हो जाता, मन नहीं घबराता॥
~ Jis ghar mein tum rahtin, sab sadgun aata,
~ Sab sambhav ho jata, man nahin ghabrata.
= Every virtue comes to the home where you live; everything becomes possible and the mind is free of fear.

---
तुम बिन यज्ञ न होते, वस्त्र न कोई पाता।
खान पान का वैभव, सब तुमसे आता॥
~ Tum bin yagya na hote, vastra na koi pata,
~ Khaan paan ka vaibhav, sab tumse aata.
= Without you no sacrifice could be performed and no one would have clothing; all the richness of food and drink comes from you.

---
शुभ गुण मन्दिर सुन्दर, क्षीरोदधि जाता।
रत्न चतुर्दश तुम बिन, कोई नहीं पाता॥
~ Shubh gun mandir sundar, Kshirodadhi jata,
~ Ratna chaturdash tum bin, koi nahin pata.
= Beautiful temple of auspicious qualities, born of the ocean of milk: without you no one obtains the fourteen treasures.

---
महालक्ष्मी जी की आरती, जो कोई जन गाता।
उर आनन्द समाता, पाप उतर जाता॥
~ Mahalakshmi ji ki aarti, jo koi jan gata,
~ Ur anand samata, paap utar jata.
= Whoever sings this aarti of Mahalakshmi is filled with joy, and their sins fall away.
