id: shri-ramchandra-kripalu
kind: stotra
form: Stuti
deity: ram
lang: hi
language: Hindi
dialect: Braj Bhasha, heavily Sanskritised
region: North India
title: श्रीरामचन्द्र कृपालु भजु मन | Shri Ramchandra Kripalu Bhaju Man | Hymn to Shri Ram
author: Goswami Tulsidas, from the Vinaya Patrika | known
occasions: ram-navami, dussehra, diwali, sundarkand
when: Strictly a stuti, not an aarti, but it is the piece most often sung at Ram’s aarti, at Ramayan path and on Ram Navami.

---
श्रीरामचन्द्र कृपालु भजु मन, हरण भवभय दारुणम्।
नवकंज लोचन कंज मुख, कर कंज पद कंजारुणम्॥
~ Shri Ramchandra kripalu bhaju man, haran bhavbhay daarunam,
~ Navkanj lochan kanj mukh, kar kanj pad kanjarunam.
= O mind, worship the compassionate Shri Ramchandra, who removes the terrible fear of worldly life: eyes like fresh lotuses, a lotus face, lotus hands and feet like red lotuses.

---
कंदर्प अगणित अमित छवि, नवनील नीरद सुन्दरम्।
पट पीत मानहुँ तड़ित रुचि, शुचि नौमि जनक सुतावरम्॥
~ Kandarp aganit amit chhavi, navneel neerad sundaram,
~ Pat peet maanahun tadit ruchi, shuchi naumi Janak sutavaram.
= His beauty outshines countless Kamadevs; he is lovely as a fresh dark rain-cloud, and his yellow robe gleams like lightning. I bow to that pure one, husband of Janak’s daughter.

---
भजु दीनबन्धु दिनेश दानव, दैत्यवंश निकन्दनम्।
रघुनन्द आनन्दकन्द कोशलचन्द, दशरथ नन्दनम्॥
~ Bhaju deenbandhu dinesh daanav, daityavansh nikandanam,
~ Raghunand anandkand Koshalchand, Dashrath nandanam.
= Worship the friend of the humble, radiant as the sun, who uprooted the clans of demons: joy of the Raghus, root of bliss, moon of Koshal, son of Dasharath.

---
सिर मुकुट कुण्डल तिलक चारु, उदारु अंग विभूषणम्।
आजानुभुज शर चाप धर, संग्राम जित खरदूषणम्॥
~ Sir mukut kundal tilak chaaru, udaaru ang vibhooshanam,
~ Aajanubhuj shar chaap dhar, sangram jit Khar-Dooshanam.
= A crown on his head, earrings and a graceful tilak, fine ornaments on every limb; arms reaching to his knees, holding bow and arrows, he defeated Khar and Dooshan in battle.

---
इति वदति तुलसीदास शंकर, शेष मुनि मन रंजनम्।
मम हृदय कंज निवास कुरु, कामादि खलदल गंजनम्॥
~ Iti vadati Tulsidas Shankar, Shesh muni man ranjanam,
~ Mam hriday kanj nivaas kuru, kaamaadi khaldal ganjanam.
= So says Tulsidas: delight of the hearts of Shankar, Shesh and the sages, make your home in the lotus of my heart and destroy the wicked host of desire and the other vices.
