id: vaishnav-jan-to
kind: bhajan
deity: vishnu
lang: gu
language: Gujarati
region: Gujarat, and all of India through Gandhi’s prayer meetings
title: वैष्णव जन तो तेने कहिये | Vaishnav Jan To Tene Kahiye | Who is a true devotee
author: Narsinh Mehta, 15th century. The last verse carries his name. | known
occasions: daily
when: Mahatma Gandhi’s favourite bhajan, sung at his prayer meetings and today at school assemblies and on 2 October.
notes: Shown in Devanagari, as printed in most Hindi bhajan books. In Gujarati script it begins “વૈષ્ણવ જન તો તેને કહીએ”.
refrain-first: yes

--- refrain
वैष्णव जन तो तेने कहिये जे पीड पराई जाणे रे।
पर दुःखे उपकार करे तो ये मन अभिमान न आणे रे॥
~ Vaishnav jan to tene kahiye je peed parai jaane re,
~ Par dukhe upkar kare to ye man abhiman na aane re.
= Call that person a true devotee who feels the pain of others, who helps those in sorrow and never lets pride into the mind.

---
सकळ लोकमां सहुने वंदे, निंदा न करे केनी रे।
वाच काछ मन निश्चळ राखे, धन धन जननी तेनी रे॥
~ Sakal lokman sahune vande, ninda na kare keni re,
~ Vach kachh man nishchal rakhe, dhan dhan janani teni re.
= Such a person honours everyone in the world and speaks ill of no one, and keeps word, deed and mind steady. Blessed, blessed is the mother who bore them.

---
समदृष्टि ने तृष्णा त्यागी, परस्त्री जेने मात रे।
जिह्वा थकी असत्य न बोले, परधन नव झाले हाथ रे॥
~ Samdrishti ne trushna tyagi, parstri jene maat re,
~ Jihva thaki asatya na bole, pardhan nav jhale haath re.
= They see all with an equal eye and have given up craving; every other woman is a mother to them. Their tongue never tells a lie, and their hand never takes another’s wealth.

---
मोह माया व्यापे नहि जेने, दृढ वैराग्य जेना मनमां रे।
रामनाम शुं ताळी लागी, सकळ तीरथ तेना तनमां रे॥
~ Moh maya vyape nahi jene, dridh vairagya jena manman re,
~ Ramnaam shun tali lagi, sakal tirath tena tanman re.
= Delusion and illusion cannot touch them; firm detachment fills their mind. They are absorbed in the name of Ram, and every place of pilgrimage lives within them.

---
वणलोभी ने कपटरहित छे, काम क्रोध निवार्या रे।
भणे नरसैयो तेनुं दरसन करतां, कुळ एकोतेर तार्या रे॥
~ Vanlobhi ne kapatrahit chhe, kaam krodh nivarya re,
~ Bhane Narsaiyo tenun darsan kartan, kul ekoter tarya re.
= They are free of greed and deceit, and have overcome lust and anger. Narsinh says: just seeing such a person saves seventy-one generations of one’s family.
