id: sukhkarta-dukhharta
kind: aarti
deity: ganesh
lang: mr
language: Marathi
region: Maharashtra
title: सुखकर्ता दुःखहर्ता | Sukhkarta Dukhharta | Marathi aarti of Shri Ganesh
author: Samarth Ramdas, 17th century. The last verse carries his signature, “दास रामाचा”. | attributed
occasions: ganesh-chaturthi, daily
when: Opens the aarti in Maharashtrian homes and Ganeshotsav pandals; the session usually ends with “घालीन लोटांगण” and Mantrapushpanjali.
notes: The refrain follows each verse rather than opening the aarti. It is set in a Marathi cut of the typeface, because a few letters are traditionally drawn differently in Marathi.
refrain-first: no

--- refrain
जय देव जय देव जय मंगलमूर्ती।
दर्शनमात्रे मनकामना पुरती॥
~ Jai Dev jai Dev jai Mangalmurti,
~ Darshanmatre mankamana purti.
= Glory, Lord, to the auspicious one: the mere sight of you fulfils the heart’s wishes.

---
सुखकर्ता दुःखहर्ता वार्ता विघ्नाची।
नुरवी पुरवी प्रेम कृपा जयाची।
सर्वांगी सुंदर उटी शेंदुराची।
कंठी झळके माळ मुक्ताफळांची॥
~ Sukhkarta dukhharta varta vighnachi,
~ Nuravi puravi prem krupa jayachi.
~ Sarvangi sundar uti shendurachi,
~ Kanthi jhalake maal muktaphalanchi.
= Giver of joy and remover of sorrow, whose grace leaves not even a whisper of obstacles and showers love. His whole body glows with vermilion paste and a string of pearls gleams at his throat.

---
रत्नखचित फरा तुज गौरीकुमरा।
चंदनाची उटी कुंकुमकेशरा।
हिरेजडित मुकुट शोभतो बरा।
रुणझुणती नूपुरे चरणी घागरिया॥
~ Ratnakhachit phara tuj Gaurikumara,
~ Chandanachi uti kumkumkeshara.
~ Hirejadit mukut shobhato bara,
~ Runjhunati nupure charani ghagariya.
= Son of Gauri, jewels adorn you and you are anointed with sandalwood, kumkum and saffron. A diamond-studded crown shines on you, and anklets with tiny bells jingle at your feet.

---
लंबोदर पीतांबर फणिवरबंधना।
सरळ सोंड वक्रतुंड त्रिनयना।
दास रामाचा वाट पाहे सदना।
संकटी पावावे निर्वाणी रक्षावे सुरवरवंदना॥
~ Lambodar pitambar phanivarbandhana,
~ Saral sond vakratunda trinayana.
~ Das Ramacha vaat pahe sadana,
~ Sankati pavave nirvani rakshave survaravandana.
= Big-bellied lord in yellow silk with a serpent for a sash, straight-trunked, curve-faced, three-eyed. Ramdas, your servant, waits for you at home: come to us in trouble and protect us at the last, lord worshipped by the gods.
