id: shiva-panchakshara-stotram
kind: stotra
deity: shiv
lang: sa
language: Sanskrit
region: All of India
title: शिवपञ्चाक्षर स्तोत्रम् | Shiva Panchakshara Stotram | A hymn on the five syllables of Namah Shivaya
author: Traditionally attributed to Adi Shankaracharya | attributed
occasions: mahashivratri, shravan, daily
when: Recited in Shiv puja and on Mondays. Each verse is built on one syllable of the mantra: न, म, शि, वा, य.
notes: Verse three is sometimes printed with “गौरीवदनाब्जबृन्द”.

---
नागेन्द्रहाराय त्रिलोचनाय भस्माङ्गरागाय महेश्वराय।
नित्याय शुद्धाय दिगम्बराय तस्मै नकाराय नमः शिवाय॥
~ Nagendraharaya trilochanaya, bhasmangaragaya Maheshwaraya,
~ Nityaya shuddhaya digambaraya, tasmai nakaraya namah Shivaya.
= To the three-eyed great lord who wears the king of serpents as a garland and sacred ash on his body; eternal, pure, clothed only by the directions: to that Shiv, the syllable “Na”, I bow.

---
मन्दाकिनीसलिलचन्दनचर्चिताय नन्दीश्वरप्रमथनाथमहेश्वराय।
मन्दारपुष्पबहुपुष्पसुपूजिताय तस्मै मकाराय नमः शिवाय॥
~ Mandakinisalila chandana charchitaya, Nandishwara pramathanatha Maheshwaraya,
~ Mandara pushpa bahupushpa supujitaya, tasmai makaraya namah Shivaya.
= Bathed in the Ganga and anointed with sandal paste, lord of Nandi and of his hosts, worshipped with mandara and countless other flowers: to that Shiv, the syllable “Ma”, I bow.

---
शिवाय गौरीवदनाब्जवृन्दसूर्याय दक्षाध्वरनाशकाय।
श्रीनीलकण्ठाय वृषध्वजाय तस्मै शिकाराय नमः शिवाय॥
~ Shivaya Gauri vadanabja vrinda suryaya, Dakshadhvara nashakaya,
~ Shri Neelakanthaya vrishadhvajaya, tasmai shikaraya namah Shivaya.
= To the auspicious one, the sun at whose rising Gauri’s lotus face blooms, who ended Daksha’s sacrifice; to the blue-throated one whose banner bears the bull: to that Shiv, the syllable “Shi”, I bow.

---
वसिष्ठकुम्भोद्भवगौतमार्यमुनीन्द्रदेवार्चितशेखराय।
चन्द्रार्कवैश्वानरलोचनाय तस्मै वकाराय नमः शिवाय॥
~ Vasishtha kumbhodbhava Gautamarya munindra devarchita shekharaya,
~ Chandrarka vaishvanara lochanaya, tasmai vakaraya namah Shivaya.
= Whose head is worshipped by Vasishtha, Agastya, Gautam and the great sages and gods; whose three eyes are the moon, the sun and fire: to that Shiv, the syllable “Va”, I bow.

---
यक्षस्वरूपाय जटाधराय पिनाकहस्ताय सनातनाय।
दिव्याय देवाय दिगम्बराय तस्मै यकाराय नमः शिवाय॥
~ Yakshasvaroopaya jatadharaya, pinakahastaya sanatanaya,
~ Divyaya devaya digambaraya, tasmai yakaraya namah Shivaya.
= Who appeared as a yaksha, wears matted hair and holds the Pinaka bow, the eternal one; divine, radiant, clothed by the directions: to that Shiv, the syllable “Ya”, I bow.

--- फल
पञ्चाक्षरमिदं पुण्यं यः पठेच्छिवसन्निधौ।
शिवलोकमवाप्नोति शिवेन सह मोदते॥
~ Panchaksharamidam punyam yah pathechchhivasannidhau,
~ Shivalokamavapnoti Shivena saha modate.
= Whoever recites this sacred hymn of the five syllables near Shiv reaches Shiv’s world and rejoices with him.
